So to make this really clear again, what's our problem here?
The problem is that in bigger apps where we have a lot of widgets and of course, potentially way more
widgets than I have here on the slide,
when some child widget needs some data, we typically have to manage the data in our topmost widget, in
the MyApp widget here because different places of the app need the data and therefore, we have to use
the common denominator so that we can pass data through the constructors of widgets because that is
how we typically distribute values or data
right now. We pass them as arguments to other widgets and that can lead to very long chains of here's
an argument, please forward it, here's an argument, please forward it where we pass data through widgets
that don't care about it just because some child widget cares and that's a problem we want to fix
with state management because it can be cumbersome and difficult to pass data through constructors
and besides that extra hassle as a developer which we don't want to have, it can also impact our application
performance because if we manage everything in the main.dart file and there in our main widget or in
a couple of root widgets, then these widgets rebuild whenever anything and that data changes and therefore
the entire widget tree rebuilds even if only one small child widget somewhere in the tree is really
interested in the updated data. Take our navigation example from the previous sections where we built
our meals app with some extra navigation in there. We're managing all our meals data and that includes
things like which are the favorites of the user and which filters that the user set, all that data is
managed here in the main.dart file and the downside is that
in here, we basically rebuild all widgets which we render here,
so all the widgets we routed to, we loaded as screens, we rebuild these widgets whenever anything changes
here.
If you add a meal as a favorite or if you change your filters, then the entire app rebuilds, even the
parts that are not affected by this.
If you for example add a meal as a favorite, that doesn't impact your filters and still, that part of
the app would also rebuild.
So the constant rebuilding of everything is of course not great for performance,
you only want to run the build method in the widgets that really depend on the data that changed
and you don't want to rebuild the entire app just because you changed some data which is required
in some parts of your app.
So that's one annoying part,
the other annoying part is what you see down there.
We're passing all the data as arguments to other widgets, here I'm passing the favorite meals to the
TabsScreen. The TabsScreen itself does not need the favorite meals,
we only need the favorite meals in the TabsScreen here because we then forward them to the favorites
screen and that's exactly what I also meant. Besides the performance thing and so on,
we're forwarding data through widgets and that means that whenever we add a new widget in between, then
we also have to accept the data there and forward it,
if we change something, we have to change the arguments we receive,
it's really cumbersome to manage this and it's not really efficient or the way we want to do that.
Hence, we need a better way of managing our state
and for that let me first clarify what state and state management really means. In Flutter applications
and in front-end applications in general, it's always about managing data and the user interface that
reflects that data.
When your data changes, something typically changes on the user interface because your user interface
really just reflects your data in the end but data is a broad term here,
data can be anything.
It can be the products you show in your app,
it can be something like is this product a favorite of the user
or is this user logged in
and it's this data we also refer to as state. State is simply data which affects the user interface and which
also might change over time,
so something like are we currently loading new data?
Well if that changes, you probably want to show a loading spinner on the user interface. So that information
is also a piece of data that affects your app, your UI and which therefore would be labeled as state.
The user interface in the end is just a function of your data or of your state,
which means if your data, if your state changes, the user interface changes.
Now for state, you have a couple of different kinds of state and that's not a hard separation you have
to learn,
it's just helpful for understanding what I mean when I say state. We have application-wide state and
we have widget or local state. Now app-wide state as the name suggests affects the entire application
or at least large chunks of the app
and examples here would be the authentication status of a user, is the user authenticated.
If the user is not authenticated, we typically want to show a totally different app,
we want to show a login screen instead of our products but the loaded products themselves could be
data that is required in many parts of your app,
maybe not in every part but you need the loaded products in the ProductsOverview, in the product detail
screen,
also maybe in parts of your shopping cart screens.
So these are pieces of data which you need in many places of your app or which have an impact on the
entire app or on large chunks of the app. And widget or local state on the other hand is really just
states that affects only a widget on its own and does not affect other widgets
and a typical example here would be a loading spinner,
should I display a loading spinner in this widget?
This piece of information does probably not affect any other widget but it's important for this widget
and what you display in there or when you manage form input, so text input the user enters, things like
is the data the user entered valid or are there errors in the data the user entered.
That's really only relevant to this widget because you might want to show an error message there,
it's not relevant to a totally different part of your app.
So these are roughly the categories of state which you can differentiate and state in general is really
just data in your app which changes and affects your UI.